I think, you know, it's probably human nature, but it seems that people remember the suffering of other people most vividly, if anything, you know, so that I had no trouble finding people who would tell me, you know, what my mother went through.
Oh, no, no.
Like, I described something.
You know, she was capable of anger.
You know, remember the scene where she beats up the mule, where she threw rocks on the mule and so forth.
And she was very emotional and...
It was a human being, yeah.
Oh yeah, and I remember her humor, you know.
I remember, you know, I didn't put this in the book, but the first time I had, you know, I couldn't sleep in the afternoon.
Greek people sleep in the afternoon.
I would go wandering around.
there was a young man in our neighborhood who just got married, and of course, everybody lived in the same house, so he had gone to a hay shed, you know, with his wife in the afternoon to make love to her.
And I was wandering along because I couldn't sleep, and I hear these grunting noises.
It must have been about six or six, I think.
And I looked through the window, and I saw these two legs up in the air, you know, and him puffing and puffing, you know.
And then he, you know, he sort of pulled off her, you know.
And the window was in such a way that I saw her
private parts, you know.
I'm just telling you the idea.
And so I went back and I described it all to my mother and I said, you know, I saw this thing, you know, it was like a fish that opened and closed, you know.
And she called all the neighbors, you know, and had me tell to hear it and everything.
So, I mean, she, it was...
She doesn't have humor, you know.
She was very, she was a human being.
But I'm wondering if you remember her about her.
Oh yeah, absolutely.
Absolutely.
What I do remember about her that makes her unusual, rare, is that
when she, you know, she was not somebody who looked for troubles, you know, and basically she avoided it and sort of, you know, tried to bend, you know.
One of the things that she used to have is, you know, the tree that bends to solid sleeves, you know, on its branches.
But we, well, when she made up her mind, it's something
She was nothing to swear.
And when she decided to go, and my sister said, I won't go, she said, you know, I will go tell them what you were planning, and they'll kill me in front of you, and she would have done it, you know.
She was... She was... There was not a bluff.
My sister knew her, but they knew her, and they knew her.
Because she could not bear to lose...
And, which is, it's an awful phrase in English, but in, in Greek, you know, but I can, you know, it's something that people... And then there was one witness who was taught to use it, yes.
Yeah, there were, there were, well, there was a fellow taxi who was there.
And there was this woman who went back.
She didn't quite see it.
She just heard it and started running back.
But it was this little gnome of a man who told me about it.
And you said you couldn't get any fear earlier and had it back to you.
I think you said that's why you wanted to go into that.
Yeah.
And I could have, it was a little weird.
But, you know, the needs of the right area, I said to myself, I need this guy, you know, I need more information from this guy.
You know, he had been, you know, he had been captive by the, and he had spent 17 years, 18 years in jail, so he went, it was paid.
Is there anyone,
Well, I think
No, no, I know it, you know, it's really, and it's the thing that I think that has given me tremendous advantage in life and has made my life a lot better than most people's lives.
It's the love of family and children and people.
Happiness comes from human relationships, not from anything else.
And that's the only thing we're done for.
People you love.
And I don't know if I'm capable of dying for somebody else, but she couldn't be right.
And I do know that, I mean, that's why I live here, close to my family, close to my sister.
I mean, I can live anywhere and I can survive anywhere and I have, you know.
But this is where my roots are, where I get my nourishment, my emotions.
For me, it's not just me, it's my whole family.
My sisters, my brothers and all, my nephews, my everybody.
About a hundred people.
Yeah, pretty much.
And this is what I prize the most in my life, you know.
And this gives me tremendous strength because I know if I lose everything else, I mean, having that is enough.
You mentioned early on in the book that you actually engineered, or you suggest that you engineered outside of Athens to do this particular story?
I think so, you know.
You know, I did a lot of things.
I think I became a investigative reporter for the same reason.
I think everything I did was really training for this.
And, you know, I didn't realize it until I started doing it.
To find out at the beginning of both?
Well, I mean, the most visible...
The emotion on the service was to get even, basically, but the... Yeah, to avenge myself.
Yeah, to get even.
But deeper down, I think, and more real, was to find out.
My mother has always, you know, has always treated me as a human being.
I mean, I don't know...
Any other person, I have, you know, personally, I've read about them
made a conscious decision to die for coming home.
This book, obviously, is about your mother, obviously.
But there's a wider case study.
I read there's a case study and a wider... Did you intend that?
You definitely tell me everything I need to know about them.
Well, it's three things, really.
First of all, it's about my mother.
And second, it's a love story, you know, it's a love story of a basic, the most basic kind is the love of a pagan child, you know, etc.
But also, it's about a world that no longer exists, and the world of the Greeks, of a rural peasant village.
And where basically, which is a microcosm of the world as a whole, you know, with all its hatreds and abilities and humanity and so forth.
So it was a way of me, you know, I wanted to find out everything about this world.
I mean, I found out more, you know, what I had is only about one sentence in the book.
And beyond that, it's also really a...
I studied the corruption of revolutions and of high hopes and of the futility of putting any cause above human life.
The futility and the futility.
Actually, the only thing worth, you know, the thing is my mother really likes what her life means, what her death means, basically, is that the only thing worth sacrificing me for is for someone you love.
Nothing else.
No cause.
I've been leaving.
I mean, I had deep convictions and I would fight in a war to defend freedom and all justice and all that stuff like that.
But, you know, if somebody said to me, you know, you know, step in front of a firing squad for any cause, I would not do it.
I imagine that this is just about... Yeah.
But it was safe.
I mean, this year was...
But it was the same.
Again, it was this iron world dedication, I guess.
Well, it's really about women as well.
In most of the world, women struggle with
basic questions of survival, of keeping their children alive, let alone whether they should send them to a daycare centre, whether they can keep them alive.
And this is true, one of the most in two-thirds of the world, unfortunately.
And the burden of
of life is more heavily laid on women, you know, in my view, than on men.
I'm talking about in generalities now, in general terms.
And the strongest people I've ever met have, and the people I've admired most, have been women, and the most influential people in my life have been women, you know, my mother, the school teacher, and my wife.
Yeah.
That's about the razor and the bullet and stuff.
He's a roof, that's him.
Did you tell him?
No, I didn't.
I've talked to some of them.
They say, I'll go do it, you know.
Where is he?
I don't think much... It's funny, but, you know, a lot of people have told me, you know, and I... I question myself about it.
I mean, it's the thing...
In a way, it was facing something that would have said for me, and... I had that sort of a mentality.
You know, my mother put her life on the line for me, and in the end, I couldn't do it for her, you know.
It's not, but, you know...
She was saving people.
You would save nobody.
That's true.
I've never heard of that.
I mean, that doesn't mean you wouldn't feel bad by doing it.
I would have felt a lot better, actually.
But the guy was so old, I wish I'd found him when he was 55, you know, and hostile, and then, you know, it would have been easier.
I would have done anything.
But, you know, basically I didn't want to change the focus of what happened to my mother because it's focused on my act rather than her act.
You know, because her acts are more important to me.
Her sacrifice is more important than my vengeance.
And that's her.
Yeah.
I don't know what else to ask you right now.
I mean, I said that.
Yeah.
Well, you know, there are emotions that exist everywhere.
But it doesn't matter to me.
I think this is what I want my...
Well, you know, I hope that
I will write something meaningful again, but nothing that I will write again that I have written before, it is personally meaningful.
It is personally meaningful.
It can be.
It is work out of there.
What's the first, I asked you this earlier, how do you feel when you finish it?
Do you feel, have you established in your own mind that you're finished with your example?
Well, I feel that
I've fulfilled my mission in life.
I mean, this is a goal I set for myself to write a book about what happened and to write it in a way that would be meaningful to a lot of people so that, you know, what happened there is not only not forgotten, but it's...
It helps just a little bit to improve the species, you know.
How about, are you... I mean, the reason I was in Europe, I know, yeah.
I think that was a very long speech.
Have you won?
You say in the book, I left my job.
Yeah, I did, I left my job.
But, you know, I have such a close relationship with them that there are certain things that are...